Absolute and relative positioning are two CSS properties used to control the placement of elements within the layout of a web page. They have distinct behaviors:

Relative Positioning:

When you set an element's position to "relative" using CSS (position: relative;), it remains in the normal flow of the document.
However, you can adjust its position relative to its normal position using the top, right, bottom, and left properties. These properties move the element from its original position, but the space it would have occupied in the normal flow remains, causing other elements to flow around it.
Relative positioning is often used when you want to fine-tune the position of an element relative to its normal flow, without affecting the layout of other elements.
Example:


.box {
    position: relative;
    top: 20px;
    left: 30px;
}
Absolute Positioning:

When you set an element's position to "absolute" using CSS (position: absolute;), it is removed from the normal document flow. It is positioned relative to its nearest positioned ancestor, or if none is found, relative to the initial containing block (usually the <html> element).
Absolute positioning allows you to specify the exact position of an element using the top, right, bottom, and left properties. The element's position is then calculated based on its nearest positioned ancestor.
Elements with absolute positioning do not affect the layout or positioning of other elements on the page. They can overlap other elements if their coordinates are not carefully managed.
Example:



.box {
    position: absolute;
    top: 50px;
    left: 100px;
}
Key Differences:

Normal Flow: Relative positioning retains an element in the normal document flow, whereas absolute positioning removes it from the flow.
Reference Point: In absolute positioning, the element's position is determined by its nearest positioned ancestor, whereas in relative positioning, it's relative to its normal position.
Impact on Layout: Relative positioning can affect the layout and positioning of nearby elements since it still occupies space in the document flow. Absolute positioning does not affect the layout of other elements.
Overlap: Elements with absolute positioning can overlap each other or other elements if their positions are not carefully managed. Relative positioning does not inherently cause overlapping.
In summary, the choice between absolute and relative positioning depends on your design requirements. Use relative positioning when you want to make small adjustments to the position of an element within the normal flow, and use absolute positioning when you need precise control over an element's position and are not concerned about its impact on other elements in the layout.